[Music]
on behalf of namitha Coakley William
Dalrymple and all my colleagues at
teamwork odds I welcome you to a new
digital series glf
brave new world those of you who've
missed our earlier episodes may watch
them on our Facebook page
jlf lit fest and on our youtube channel
jpr lit fest to tell you more about the
fabulous speakers we have lined up for
you in the coming weeks
please welcome festival directors now
it's a go play and William view to our
first digital session some days ago and
we returned again today with more
programming which looks the brave new
world we are trying to understand and to
access do TuneIn dueling can do engage
do comment as we celebrate books hello
my name is William Dalrymple I'm one of
the co-directors of the Jaipur
Literature Festival and I'm here to
encourage you to turn on for brave new
world this is the Jaipur in exile online
digital festival we have an
extraordinary array of writers there are
not many positive things coming out of
this terrible pandemic but one that that
one positive thing is that all the
writers we've ever wanted at Jaipur who
for one reason or another weren't able
to make it so far have all said yes and
we have writers such as Robert McFarlane
Peter Carey and under bottle Emma Duvall
writers we have longed to bring to you
before who've been too busy or unable to
make the journey who are now going to
make it digitally online to a screen
near you so lock down log in and join us
please for brave new world
given the state of the world we're over
3.5 billion people are under lockdown
today's episode is vital in
understanding the current global health
crisis
Carola chronicles the past present and
future of pandemics by Siddharth
mukherjee considered to be amongst the
greatest medical minds talks to oxford
historian peter franco pan who predicted
the outbreak of a major pandemic six
months before it happened so that
Bokashi is the author of the Emperor of
all maladies a biography of cancer
winner of the 2011 Pulitzer Prize and
the laws of medicine is the editor of
best science writing 13 the Jean an
intimate history is his latest work
[Music]
we've structure me fine our physicians
well the DA bill with us at Geoff's
brave new world if you thank you Peter
Frank O'Bannon is professor of global
history at Oxford University there is
also the Stavros Niarchos foundation
director of the Oxford Centre for
Byzantine research his books include the
Silk Roads the music roots the First
Crusade in 2019 he was named wolf was 50
top top thinkers but Prospect magazine
work Peter fabulous to have you on board
own way from Oxford thank you for
joining us or audiences please do share
the sessions as they're aired on your
social media handles you can questions
of both our speakers today by ending it
your online section at the end we will
pose them to both speakers and hopefully
we'll have some time to be able to have
that interaction meanwhile do remember
to follow our handles here left
bandwidth issues which we know is a real
problem right now across the world you
can find us on our YouTube channel
g/b are lit fost Sadat Mukherjee and
Peter Franko pan over to both of you
thank you thank you very much for the
kind introduction it's a great pleasure
said to meet and talk I wish we were on
the front lawn in Jaipur which is my
favorite literary festival in the world
but we'll save up hopefully for next
time if the if the viewers demand that
we come hopefully find a way in the
future but tell me I said because you
have this extremely range both of
looking at pandemics from a point of
view of a doctor but also as a historian
of disease what tell us your finger in
the air of where you think we are
globally what what is going on with
covet 19 right now how do you see this
is a medical practitioner in terms of
likelihood of vaccinations and so on and
then it'd be great to talk about about
pandemics more broadly but how do you
see the world today in the 11th of April
2020 with half the world's population
locked down
well obviously with first of all thank
you Peter and a big fan of your work
and thank you for for for being with me
on this session you know we I'm in New
York City we are at one of the
epicenters of the pandemic if you open
the window the streets are empty they're
windblown there's a the only sound you
can hear is of ambulances rushing up and
down bringing people to the hospital we
you had predicted and others had
predicted that there would be an endemic
like this but the experience of it is
very surreal the the the experience of
it from Wuhan from from from Italy and
from Spain were also real but but seeing
it front hand in New York City is is
extraordinary and it's extraordinarily
surreal where should one begin we might
begin by saying that you know we
live in a in a very different world then
we lived in a century ago Global Travel
Inn is is part of our our world global
economies are part of our or were part
of our you know bread and butter
economic life sustains human creative
life and we made deeper and deeper dives
into a world where travel and and
movement was just part assumed as part
of part of human human life the first
case in the United States was reported
in January it was a 35 year old man who
came back from visiting his relatives or
friends in Wuhan and and went to a small
clinic in Washington State
and presented with a dry cough we as a
country knew that this was coming
we I would say I've spoken many times
but we were desperately unprepared we
were caught by surprise although we
should not have been caught by surprise
we are now doing a lot of genetic
analysis on the Y virus and learning
that in fact the virus had probably
began to circulate in New York City even
by the early part of February went and
so for that for the United States we
were about a month behind the ball and
then there were several failings
including the failings of screening and
and finding the other of the virus if
you take a very global picture of this
if you pan back from all the details
it's a reminder that we created a global
world worried about bio terror
but didn't worry enough about my biology
itself and and in doing so put us put
ourselves up for a kind of peril
which was not avoidable but was much
much more contained than that one we
have and we can talk a lot about the
drugs and the vaccines so you can be so
many different things I'd like to talk
about so you know but but why is it that
coronaviruses are so dangerous well what
is it that makes that that is different
to influenza viruses what is it about
about this particular variant of a SARS
or of Kobe 19 of ourselves - why is this
one I mean I understand that we're
connected I understand it could have
been contained better dealt with that
source in China and so on and that's
from a historians point of view very
interesting but just from the medical
perspective what makes Tobit 19 and
other coronaviruses unusual difficult to
treat are we medically unprepared for
them anyway
how come they manage to propagate so so
effectively well so there are several
features of this particular virus but
let's talk about coronaviruses in
general viruses are a large family of
viruses their RNA viruses what there are
two features of this virus two or three
features of this virus that make it
particularly dangerous the one the first
one which is now still being measured is
something called the R naught or the R 0
of this virus and that is a measure of
how many people it can you can infect if
you have the virus yourself so usually
viruses that don't spread rapidly have
are zeros under one below the number 1
that means you when you get the virus
you can infect one more person but
usually less than that this virus if you
don't do any containment has an r0 of
around 2 to 3 which means that it puts
it in an excellent exponential form
which of course people don't fully grasp
but but exponents are extraordinary 2
becomes 4 4 becomes 16 16 becomes and so
so so so so we are we are dealing with a
virus that has an extraordinary
exponential capacity to grow
why is that just before you tell me so
why is that why why is it able to hook
on to the receptor cells how come it's
how come it's so successful the quick
answer is that we don't know it probably
has to do with the amount of virus that
is spread to respire through droplets
and so if so the so called viral load in
respiratory droplets of people who are
sick is quite large and secondly we have
a lot of receptors for the virus we know
the receptor that the virus latches on
to it's a it's called AC e2 it's very
common it's a present across the entire
respiratory epithelium also in our in
our guts in the intestines and other
places so we don't exactly know why but
both viral factors and host factors make
this virus very spreadable it's the the
good news is that it's not a long it's
not a long lasting virus in the sense
that you know it doesn't sit around for
a long time you can you know it's quite
fragile actually you can heat it up you
can bake it off using an oven that's how
we're using to decontaminate equipment
it's very sensitive to soap and and
Lysol and all these other kinds of
things so so that's the that's one part
of the problem the second part of the
problem the same part equation is that
aside from its r0 being very high it
also has a bigger problem and that is
that it has asymptomatic characters
that's a huge problem because unlike
SARS so remember SARS co2 is a is a
cousin of SARS
unlike SARS where you know you had if
you got Sarge you got sick as for the
most part
unlike sorry Sarge go through behaves
very unusually in the sense that some
people have the virus and can be choked
and transmitted but be totally
asymptomatic and in fact we think now
that most of the viral transmission
that's going on in places is from these
asymptomatic carriers and then once in a
while for reasons that we completely
don't understand
but again has to do with viral factors
and with most factors you can get
tremendously sick from it we can talk
about the sickness in a second what that
sickness sickness exactly is and the
range of that sickness because there's
new data from yesterday that is a very
very fascinating but just to give you
one example I have a very close
colleague who's an oncologist she and
her husband who's a cardiologist the
both of them got covered 19 he fell
critically ill and both tested positive
and she was completely asymptomatic
living in the same household in the same
family you know obviously you know
likely exchange of respiratory droplets
between them but but one was critically
ill and one was not so that's just I
read your piece in The New Yorker and I
just now about about viral loads which
needs to be critical and I know that you
say how little we know about viral loads
but I mean that also leads into the idea
that you know that these pandemics they
do they don't come around like clockwork
but they are relatively predictable
insofar as we we've just the problem as
a as a world how to cope when these
kinds of things happen but tell me a
little bit about the viral load side of
things about I mean it's an
extraordinary case that you can have a
couple living together eating together
sleep or showing the same bed etc etc
and one person you know heads towards
towards the ICU unit and the other one
is totally fine what is the biological
explanation for those of us who aren't
don't remember their biology from well
off from school well we the quick answer
is that we don't know we suspect that
that the initial for most respiratory
viruses the amount of virus that you get
so in other words you can imagine the
body as a battlefield and and as an
equilibrium the immune system tries to
attack and dampen the virus the block
the virus tries to attack and kill cells
and replicate itself so for most
respiratory viruses including influenza
and in fact sorry
the amount of virus that you get likely
determines part of the outcome of the
battle in other words if you get a lot
of virus you overwhelm the immune system
and you can establish a serious
infection and so I don't know I'm
speculating but the in this particular
case one of them of the couple is a
cardiologist someone who would who was
in the wards a lot seen a lot of
patients with kovat I will come back to
that in a second the other one is an
oncologist where where in fact the
amount of exposure to Koch initial
exposure to kovin was likely very very
little but that's just speculation once
the virus is established itself in your
body there's another viral load which is
how much virus you're actually
replicating inside your body and that's
also proving to be critical we now know
that patients were likely to get very
sick at least from small studies secrete
or have a lot of virus in their bodies
again reflecting this dynamic
equilibrium between the body and the
virus and those patients are likely to
do worse
the final the new bits of news as of
last night I mean they have I wake up in
the morning and I start scanning because
new starts coming in from Europe and
other places that the two new bits of
news excuse me the two new bits of
News's one thing that we didn't know is
that the virus is that in patients who
were ill the virus seems to be causing a
lot of blood clotting small blood clots
in various places a friend of mine was
infected sent me a picture of black and
blue splotches on his skin and in
autopsies we've seen that the lungs get
lots of these Micra we call them thrombi
so that's something very unusual it's
generally not the case with viruses that
you get so many thrombi and one
speculation that were sort of toying
around with in thinking very hard about
is maybe that's why people so really
compensate so quickly so in other words
you're so going along fighting the virus
having your fevers you know and the
other consequences of the infection and
then a spray of blood clot
scums and that's where blood clots
either to the brain or to the arteries
in the lung or the veins etc may be
responsible it's still too early to tell
if this is just from from autopsy series
so that's one feature that we that just
that's one piece of news that's just
fresh off the press three four articles
on it distance this morning and the
question it raises is whether in the
early stages of infection whether one
should use an anticoagulant something to
thin the blood a blood thinner like
heparin or something I have to I have to
say that in the past when things like
this have happened
using these blood thinners turns out to
be counteractive there have been cases
in which you use a blood thinner while
you think that there's a blood clot and
in fact it increases your bleeding risk
and you die from bleeding so it's a it's
a very complicated question trying to
figure out whether this is actually
actionable or not we have many many
blood thinners available in the
pharmacopoeia
the second feature that just is again
hot off the press from last night is a
uncontrolled which is which means that
there was no control arm but a study of
a new drug which has been around and
talked about quite a lot called REM
desapear a study of about 30 odd
patients malaria is that right no so
that is not the military this is a a
drug this is a true antiviral so this
was an antiviral that was initially
created for Ebola virus okay and that
has been repurposed because we know that
it binds to the vial to the to they to
the enzyme that the virus uses to make
copies of itself so this was an
uncontrolled observational study on 30
patients 30 or 40 patients but the good
news is that it seems that they may be
activity but you know as you know with
these uncontrolled studies it's
extraordinarily hard to know that these
work or not and there's a whole history
in medicine of studies like this where
you know you have a glimmer of hope but
when you do a randomized control study
the the drug doesn't work how'd you see
it I mean at the moment my observation
is that is that governments if I
it's truly hard to cooperate with each
other we have that as a real problem in
Europe about whether members of the
European Union are willing to provide
support financial as well as medical and
so on and you know there's an argument
I've read over overnight also saying
that if in Europe we'd shut down in the
same way that whom a province was shut
down and pushed all medical staff on to
Italy when that happened maybe we could
have contained things better but we've
reacted in a different way but the the
the the place where there is an enormous
amount of high-level corporations
between academic researchers into this
area how hard is it to coordinate that
kind of lab based laboratory research I
mean I hear from I hear from my
colleagues in Oxford how well they're
doing that and I know there's a lot of
willingness to share research and share
updates but how does that community work
in practice for from your perspective as
someone who participates in in research
- so so you know there are two kinds of
research and they have to be of course
crisscross with each other one is
research basic research on the virus
itself finding new drugs and vaccines
for the virus and then there's clinical
research I you know I think the both
both factions as it were have mobilized
extraordinarily fast the genome of the
virus was sequenced within weeks and
with using various techniques genetic
techniques to track the movement of the
pandemic I think the clinical research
has and always does the clinical
research depends on on on some of this
basic research and it lags a bit when
things are ideal like with the HIV
pandemic the clinical researchers and
the basic researchers become one they
become part of the same story they
listen to each other and they learn from
each other and they crisscross with each
other and if you look at the history of
HIV that was a inflection point in HIV
research because in fact even today
there are no real animal models of HIV
you know there's there some sort of
monkey models of HIV but what what
people really started doing is using the
tools that they had been
in the laboratory and understanding
human HIV using those tools and for HIV
that was a very important inflection
point that is where we in fact define
the role of viral loads we used we began
to use these as surrogates for clinical
trials and find new medicines and push
them quickly into clinical trials by the
cooperation of the clinical researchers
and the basic scientists that is now
beginning to happen I think with with
Cove in nineteen and that's the richest
that we can offer against the virus and
is that your expectation that the way
out of this will be some kind of vaccine
based solution that's mass produced
rather than a pathway out of isolation
where there's some other kind of reason
why asymptomatic so much higher than we
think they are or that the power load is
different or changes climatically or
whatever it might be
do you think that there is that the the
way out comes through medical
intervention or vaccine backs intention
so so I so I expect and maybe I'll pose
this question back to you given the
history of other pandemics um I expect
that what's gonna happen is that it's
gonna come in phases the right now we
have really no drugs against the virus
aside from supportive care you know the
route hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine
are very poor the evidence is very poor
this new drug rammed a severe really
maybe seems to work we'll know in the
next few days the first phase of of any
drug coming out against the virus or any
activity against the virus is going to
be isolation quarantine and then
supportive care we have nothing else and
I think I I would suggest that that we
maintain this phase until we begin to
find things the second phase is going to
be using drugs that have already been
tested in humans and have some activity
the so-called repurposed drug so these
are known to be safe in humans but are
repurposed to be able to be given to
humans and REM deser there is an example
that it's already been used in humans in
in the case of Ebola and was repurposed
for
for it's used in Cyrus Cove too we'll
know in the next two weeks or three
weeks as there's more data comes out
whether it's actually active against us
our scope to or not but that that you
know the paper that came out last night
is I would say encouraging it doesn't
solve the problem with is encouraging
the third kind of drug that comes out
against the virus is going to be
man-made antibodies we know that these
are likely to work because if you take a
person who's produced who's got the
infection and has recovered from the
infection if you take their antibodies
and you transfer them to a person who's
acutely ill in a small study in JAMA it
showed that those patients would recover
so there is a possibility so there are
there's a race to make these antibodies
around the world there are many people
who are trying to make them actually I
am in conversation with the Gates
Foundation to try to make these
antibodies in in India in collaboration
with biocon with Kiran Shah had biocon
and we're actually having another
conversation tomorrow we're working
overnight to get these going these take
time to make these are not as quick as
making making a drug you know like an
aspirin or a Tylenol
which you know or repurposing a human
drug but it's a similar story to what
you've written about about about
smallpox about how you used to in the
past seek to make small infections to
part it to build up resistance inside
the body so effectively provide taking
some form of previous defense that's
that's work for somebody else and to
replicate it to provide high levels of
immunity that's right just and just a
bit just to clarify that was a very
dangerous practice and we had a
mortality rate off of 1% you you know
you might get get smallpox itself so
we've been telling people don't try to
do this at home this is not a this is
not a joke
so wait for the antibody is we will try
to make antibodies now the question
whether the antibodies can be used
you know usually antibodies lasts about
a month so you really
imagine proof relaxing the entire world
of six billion people with antibodies
that last for a month month after month
so that's it's it's it's a big band-aid
but it's a band-aid so how will how will
use those antibodies is a big question
we're all working very very hard on
trying to figure out how to use these
antibodies I had to bring them to India
and other places to the - to the
developing world through many things
including Gavi and the Gates Foundation
and through in my case a collaboration
with biocon now we come to vaccines
vaccines are the answer this is a
disease I think is likely to be able to
be vaccinated against unlike HIV it
doesn't seem to cause a chronic disease
although I was worried about these two
recent reports or one recent report from
South Korea that virus may be
reactivating but I think that that's
probably a you know retesting error I
hope it's it's a retesting error but
that said vaccines take about 12 to 18
months to make usually and remember with
a vaccine that the question of safety is
completely different you know you're
talking about about giving it to
completely healthy people so you need to
be really really sure that the vaccine
much like you talked about with smallpox
you be really really sure that you don't
cause a disease when you make a vaccine
so you so the stakes are very different
for a vaccine and so I think you know
we'll just have to wait
the first vaccines are already entering
phase 1 trials in in the United States
and across the world so there's a race
towards a vaccine as well but that race
is the slowest because of all the
reasons that we that we talked about
maybe I'll ask you I mean you know what
do you think about so the what are the
steps in a pandemic like this that will
will get us out of our homes and and
restore economic activity viable
activity in either in the United States
or in India that I don't know and I
think that that's that's that's more in
my my toolkit of any expertise or
because I think this is a this is a
the medical side has to lead on this I
mean I think what from the historians
perspective is that is that pandemics
are regular occurrences the jump from
the animal chain through climatic
through back to your logic you know that
there are whole series of circumstances
that produce these kind of freak events
relatively regularly and you know
however awful this is I mean it's not as
bad as the Black Death when when a third
of the population of Europe died but the
key thing is is how how non-specialists
and how politicians make decisions
through this process and if I understood
right from reading The Washington Post
last last week you know when when the
chief medical officer got got eventually
got hold of the president in the u.s.
that Trump wanted to talk about vaping
and when flavored vaping would be
brought back in rather than
understanding the gravity of all of this
process so you know it's true we could
have that there could've been different
steps taken across the world from China
or initially but then scrote you know
going forwards but we are where we are
the challenge will be from my
perspective what happens